## Swapping:
- Reading program from secondary mem to main mem
- Processes being moved between main memory and a **backing store**
- Is brought back to continue execution, temporary
- Occurs if:
	- Not enough memory
	- Higher priority process takes over

### Standard Swapping:
- Backing store:
	- Fast disk to accomodate copies of all mem images
- Roll In / Roll Out:
	- Swapping variant used for priority based scheduling algorithms
	- higher priority replaces lower priority
- Ready queue:
	- System maintains a queue for ready-to-run processes
- Dispatcher:
	- When the scheduler decides to run a process, it calls the dispatcher.
	- Checks if the next process to be executed lies in memory or not.

- After swapping the new address location depends on the address binding
- Modified swapping processes are used in many sytems


#### Context switch time including swapping:
- If the next process is not in the memory then we swap out a process and swap in the target process.
- Context switching time is high in case of non-preemptive processes
	- Swap out time = User program size / Hard-disk transfer rate (ms)
	- Swap in in time is same as swap out time
	- Total context switch time = swap in time + swap out time
- Other factors:
	- Pending I/O: Can't switch if I/O is going on
	- Double Buffering: transfer I/O to kernel space, then back to I/O device, adds the overhead
- Mordern OS: Swap only when free memory extremely low


### Swapping on Mobile Systems:
- Swapping is generally avoided in mobile systems as memory space is a more precious resource (because it is much rarer) than on desktop systems.
- Flash memory is used instead of hard disks
	- Poor throughput b/w flash mem and CPU
	- Supports only a certain no. of writes
- Instead of swapping:
	1. **iOS**:
	- iOS asks apps to voluntarily relinquish allocated memory
	- Read-only data are removed system and are loaded if needed
	- Data that have been modified (such as the stack) are never removed.
	- Applications that fail to free up sufficient memory may be terminated by the operating system.
	2. **Android OS**:
	- Does not support swapping
	- terminates apps if low free memory, but first writes application state to flash for fast restart


## Contiguous Allocation:
- Main memory accomodates: OS and User processes
- Contiguous allocation is an early method.
- Memory is divided into 2 partitions:
	- OS is placed at a lower address with an interrupt vector.
	- user programs are stored at higher addresses
- Relocation registers are used to protect user processes from each other and from changing OS code and data.
